From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan. I known zoom show
number two 13 recorded live
Thursday, April 29th, 2010. Support for Hanselman.
This is provided by Telerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks aspect oriented programming with
Phillip Loriano. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
And I'm sitting down today
with Phillip Loriano. Phillip is
actually calling in from Hong Kong.
Thanks for taking the time.
I guess it's about midnight.
Yeah, anytime man. So I
wanted to talk to you
because you focus on aspect
oriented programming. What is aspect
oriented programming and why should
I care? Well, aspect oriented
programming is that missing piece
of object oriented programming that
you've been hearing about over
the past 10, 15 years,
but it's kind of hard
to explain if, if you
think of it in traditional
object oriented design, I mean
with object oriented design, you
have these nice diagrams and
stuff, but there's one dimension
missing there. And that's time.
There's nothing about object going
to design that actually says,
okay, we've got to have
this one feature. They're only
in certain certain times. And
sometimes it shouldn't be there.
For example, logging. I mean,
everybody talks about logging with
AOP, but one of the
problems with traditional object oriented
design is the fact that
you've got, if you put
in a lager, you have
to put in the lager
in about a thousand different
places and you could either
have it in there, or
you could either not have
it in there. And if
you do have it in
there, it's a maintenance problem
because you've got to take
all these different instances of
that one logger that are
scattered all over the place
and somehow find a way
to take that abstraction and
make it nice and pretty.
And you can't because it's
either there or it isn't
there. And when you it's
a big problem, because I
mean, this is just a
simple logger, but imagine there
are other other features in
your application that you might
need to have, like for
example, transactions, thread, synchronization, things
like that, that you won't
be able to cleanly separate
into different classes simply because
they're just scattered all over
the place. So with aspect
oriented programming, it's not a
lot of people say it's
interception, but it isn't what
it really is, is a
way of thinking about when
things should be in, in,
in place in your application
and when they should not
be. So for example, with
the logger itself, you could
say, you know, if the
application crashes, I want the
logger to be turned on,
but it's kind of hard
to say that at least
with your traditional kind of
notation or at least in
code without having to resort
to some pretty interesting tricks
that you normally rely on
AOP to do. Okay. So
a longer is like you
said, the example that people
always give and it's a
good one because of that,
that notion of what they
call cross cutting concerns, a
logger cuts through. And typically
when you see object oriented
programming described in boxes and
lines, it involves kind of
a, a stack of things.
It kind of looks like
Tetris. And then when they
describe AOP, they draw lines
kind of perpendicularly cross cutting
throughout those. What else is
there other than logging that
I might want to use
AOP for? Well, a really
big one has to be
a lazy loading, for example,
and hibernate uses Dyna dynamic
proxies whether it's castle or,
or Lin Fu to do
this kind of lazy loading,
where even if you pull
the object out of the
database, it's not really gonna
make the query until you
actually access the object's properties
itself. I mean, it could
be anything from like five
or five or 10,000 records
in one pass. But the
point there is you want
to make sure that you
you'll be able to use
this at the same time.
You won't necessarily have to
explicitly say, I need to
use lazy loading, or I
need to put that into
my application. Other than through
maybe a setting in hibernate.
The point of aspect oriented
programming is to have that
kind of a nice separation
of concerns without having to
do some sort of really
medieval cut and paste or
copy and paste you would
normally see. And basically the
problem is it's just, there's
no clean way to actually
separate this out. It's either
it's going to be there
or it's not going to
be there. I definitely don't
recommend cut and paste, but
from what I've seen in
a lot of systems, what
happens is you've got guys
that have all these dependency
velvet plates and they have
to use the dependency. So
you can't really pull it
out, even if you were
to refactor it, you can't,
it's still going to be
there. So the problem here
is, I mean, you're back
to the example of diagrams.
I mean, in terms of
object oriented design, where we're
really looking at it as
if, I mean, this is
like the difference between a
single frame and a series
of frames of animation. I
mean, that's a good analogy
for it because when we
have an object model, I
mean, you're looking at one
picture. It never changes. But
with AOL, AOP it really,
to that idea that an
object model can change at
runtime. And there's certain features
that can be introduced and
runtime that may or may
not be there when you
actually compile the system. Well,
what did you tell me?
That was the first rule
of AOP. Oh yeah. That's
I call it the fight
club rule because one of
the hardest things to understand
about AOP is the fact
that it's supposed to be
invisible. And if you have
to explicitly use it in
your application, then you're missing
the point. Because if you,
if, if AOP is supposed
to separate concerns and then
you're explicitly saying, I need
to separate my concerns, then
you're defeating the purpose. It
has to be invisible. So
what do you use it
for other than logging though?
I mean like in, in
like a production application, Another
one is thread synchronization, for
example, or caching. Yeah. I've
seen instances where people tag
a particular method or a
property with a particular attribute
that says something like single-threaded.
So that what happens is
once the method executes, it
wraps it around a particular
center for a lock, and
then you don't even have
to worry about synchronizing it
because I'd run time. The
AOP part wraps it in
a lock so that no
matter how many threads try
to hit that one property
or method, it basically only
goes through with one thread.
And you don't, it's completely
transparent maybe aside from the
attribute or maybe the actual
code itself. I mean, you
really don't see it. And
that's probably why a lot
of people there, a lot
of people shy away from
it because it looks like
magic. And the truth is
it's not really magic at
all. I mean, I've seen
the implementations and it's not
as complicated as you think.
The only reason why I
would think that people think
it's magic as you don't
see what's going on behind
the scenes. And it's quite
simple, right. Would you say
that this is one of
those things that more people
should be using? And it's
like, I mean, like you
said, it's the first rule
is to not talk about
it. Is this the greatest
thing since sliced bread? I
mean, should everyone be doing
this and just, you have
no idea why they're not
doing it. Are you that
into this? Well, I mean,
for me, this has been
a passion for a long
time, but I personally it's,
it's no silver bullet. Of
course. It's just another tool
in the toolbox. In my
own experience, it's really made
my object models really, really
clean. I mean, we're talking
like one, one class, one
method and less than 20
lines long it's it makes
that kind of separation between
the concerns and all the
implementations that much more simple.
I mean, then you tie
it in with something like
an IOC container, and then
it's pretty much golden because
of course, IOC is handle
all the construction, but AOP
takes all these little bits
and pieces that you put
together with IOC and even
separates it even further. So
it's a great combination. Okay.
So how do you do
this in.net? How does, how
is AOP implemented in.net and
what do you have to
do? That's what's built in
like, what is Microsoft ship
and where does Microsoft drop
the ball and leave you
to? Okay, well, a couple
years ago, what happened with
what comes with Microsoft is
something called the context bound
object. And again, I call
it medieval because it's just
really, really crude. And it
had these certain events that
you could hook into. I
think it was before after
a particular method call, and
then you could add custom
go to it, but the,
where they really dropped the
ball was it forced you
to inherit from one base
class. And sometimes you can't
really do that with your
model. If you want a
clean model that has nothing
to do with Microsoft libraries,
other than maybe using some
of the system libraries itself,
that's Microsoft implementation. There are
other implementations like mine, which
is LIMU for dynamic proxies.
There's also castle. They, these
are dynamic proxies. And basically
what these things do is
it takes any existing class
and inherits from it at
runtime. And then it takes
all the calls that you
make to that inherited class
instance and redirects it to
some sort of interceptor that
allows you to inject your
own custom code. There are
other types of writers, I'll
re writers that people use
for aspect oriented programming. And
one of them is LIMU.
The other one is post
sharp, which is pretty popular.
Basically what these things do
is they take your compiled
assembly, this assemble it to
some degree and then reassemble
it with their own custom
code. So now it has
all those nice aspects that
you'd want to put into
your application, like lazy loading
or transactions or whatnot. And
the last and probably the
one I probably will never,
ever do is the unmanaged
profiler API. Basically you're working
with the CLRs unmanaged C
plus plus API for dealing
with unmanaged code. You could
pretty much hook into the
Git and actually change the
instructions right before it actually
compiled into native code. For
me, I only stick with
dynamic proxies and I'll re
writers because most of the
time they get most of
the job done. If you're
really masochistic, I would probably
recommend the unmanaged profile or
API. So how does IO
rewriting sounds really scary. I
mean, it sounds like just
initially, like my initial reaction
was like, wow, really? I
mean, I've just compiled this
and now I'm going to
go and mess around with
it again. Well, actually that's
one of the things about
IO or misconceptions about IO
that people are afraid of.
Because if you look at
the aisle, the aisle language
itself, it's a really simple
language. I mean, it still
has all the same constructs
that you would normally associate
with, you know, your CLR
1.0 language, for example, you
know, you got your, if
statements, which is a little
different, for example, you've got
branches and there is no
such thing as loops, but
what the nice thing about
using these libraries for ill
rewriting is that you never
actually have to do it
yourself. And these libraries, whether
it's LIMU pro sharp, sharp,
or castle or whatever, they
all, they're all West well-tested.
So you can't, there's no
way for whatever I'll re
rewrite or you're using to
screw up. I mean, unless
you do something really crazy
with it, most cases, the
uses are pretty benign. I
mean, I I've seen a
couple people put in pervasive
method interception throughout their entire
app, but I mean, even
in cases where they want
to intercept everything and the
kitchen sink, I've never seen
any case where it actually
caused something to break simply
because we had it. What
are some reasons why someone
would be afraid of this
though? I mean, can you
understand my initial aversion of
like, I've just assembled this
and I'm going to break
it apart and then weave
into it. Yeah. I think
it's more psychological than, than
anything. I mean, it's, I
think as programmers, we were
pretty much control the cause
we like to have control
of everything. And one of
the things that the trade
offs that you do have
to have is that you
have to surrender a part
of your application and say,
okay, yeah, I need to
add a little bit more
code to this, but when
it actually changes the IFL,
it's going to be a
little different. I mean, functionally,
it's still gonna work the
same way. Like it's still
going to do the same
thing for your business app.
But when you look at
reflector, it looks completely Debug
that, I mean, if I'm
going to go rewrite a
bunch of ill, what happens
when I decided to go
and you know, F 11
through my coat, It depends
on, on the particular I'll
rewriter. If you go with
dynamic proxies, you'll be able
to step right through it.
And you can just you'll,
you'll see where it stops
in more, in other cases
where you have I'll re
writers that do post build
time compiling or where they
modify the assembly, right after
a build there, it really
depends on whether or not
it changes the PDB file
and updates the program, debug
information so that when you
run through it, you'll, you'll
be able to see what's
going on there. So like
I said, it's, it really
depends, but there's so many
options that you can pretty
much go with whatever you
decide to order whatever fits
well, for me, I'm kind
of biased. I mean, for
simple scenario there, I'd probably
use one Fu from our
complex scenarios where it's just
really off the wall, I'd
go with AOP, which would
be with await dot AOP.
You could also go with
push sharper Just to make
sure that for, for folks
that are listening, who may
not speak English as their
initial language, he's saying Lynn
Fu L I N F
U. And that's a project
that's up at Google code.
And then he's saying post
to sharp, P O S
T Actually it's on get
hub. It's still there for
historical references. Oh, but you
moved it over to get
hub. I see. There's a
link right from there. There's
a link straightaway. Yeah. LIMU
was just one of those
things where I, I just
sat down and played around
with ILO. And then I
realized that there's so many
other language features you could
probably implement with, with just
writing the IO yourself. Hey,
it's alternate universe, Scott Hanselman,
going to thank our sponsors
for making this reshow possible.
We've been doing Hansel minutes
for almost four years now,
and we really couldn't do
it without tolerant. So I
want to tell you about
some of the stuff they're
working on. If you've already
started developing with Silverlight and
now you probably need a
solid testing tool to do
your serval at UIs. Unfortunately
though, a lot of the
tools available today only help
you with unit testing. There's
not really a good way
to simulate the actual behavior
of those end users, unless
you spend days and weeks
doing a lot of manual
testing, but the guys at
Telerx, you've got a new
point and click UI testing
tool for Silverlight called web
UI test studio. And the
beauty is that you can
quickly record your tests with
a cross browser recorder, and
you can enrich them with
code if you've got really
complex scenarios. And on top
of that, it supports all
the standard controls, as well
as the Tellerik enhanced controls.
You can verify not only
server life, but even complex
Ajax applications, best part web
UI test studio lives in
visual studio. So you don't
have to leave your favorite
development environment. You check it
out at telerik.com/web hyphen testing,
hyphen tools, and be sure
to thank Tellerik for supporting
the show on their Facebook
fan page at facebook.com/tellerik. Okay.
Before we start digging into
what you know, how someone
can get started with Lynn
Fu talk a little bit
about dynamic proxies. What is,
what is a dynamic proxy
and how does that work?
A dynamic proxy is basically
a special when you look
at it, it's basically, if
I were to write it
manually you're and you were
just to write it in
and say, see, sharper VB,
what you're really doing is
you're inheriting from a class
that has a bunch of
virtual methods. And for every
single one of those virtual
message, you redirect it to
some interceptor instance that has
all the information, like the
type arguments, the method, arguments,
the method name, and based
on that input, you could
actually change or make it
act like a real object
space. It's a dynamic implementation
of the proxy pattern. I
think it was around 2004
or 2003. Somebody figured out
that you could take reflection,
not emit, and you can
take any given type provided
that his properties were virtual.
And then redirect those calls
back to something that looked
exactly like the object. It
was, I mean, it was
pretty brilliant. I can't claim
that I invented it cause
I didn't, but that's basically
how proxies work on the
Java side. I believe they,
they haven't built in, but
for the.net side, we basically
had to create our own.
So dynamic, dynamic proxies is
how is that something that's
something I can get within
Lynn foods so that you're,
you're talking that you're saying
that there are multiple flavors
of AOP there's dynamic proxies
cause you is ill rewriting
actually digging into the compiled
stuff that you just made
and emitting more ill. And
Lynn, the Lynn Fu framework
has those, all those different
things available so I can
use different tools. There's a
whole toolbox of stuff. Yeah.
And the best part is
you don't even have to
see the aisle. You never
see it. It might sound
scary because I'm saying that
yeah, you have to, you're
giving up control. Yeah. You
do have to give up
control. But I mean, it's
pretty, it's an I, for
me, I think it's a,
it's a worthy sacrifice compared
to seeing all this stuff
look like on, at least
on an architectural level, like
it's cut, copy and paste
it everywhere. Things tend out.
I mean, I, I hate
to generalize, but it, for
me, at least it comes
out much, much cleaner when
you don't have to see
like six dependencies in a
hundred different places. Instead you
probably just see it in
one place. And with aspect
oriented programming, you get to
see where these particular dependencies
should be at runtime. And
that's the difference with traditional
object oriented design you to
say, it's either there or
it isn't there. You can't,
you can't really say when
it should be there or
when it shouldn't be there.
And that one extra dimension
makes a huge difference in
making sure that everything's clean.
Okay. So I want to
get started with, with Lynn
Fu, I've got my, you
know, maybe I'll take her
dinner, right? I've got an
existing asp.net application. And I
want to add, you know,
let's just start with logging.
What do I have to
do to get started with
Fu Well, with Lynn Fu
depending on what you want
to do with your asp.net
application, if it's NBC, you'd
probably want to hook it
in to as one of
our controller factory. And it's
like one of the very
few controller factories that could
pretty much take an infinite
number of arguments and you
could pretty much parse it
out like that. So the
first thing that you would
do is hook it into
your controller factory. After that
there are different, there's a
gazillion different ways that you
can tell the con the
IOC container itself. Okay. Once
you create this, I want
you to hook into this
particular aspect or introduce this
particular feature. Like for example,
I've, I've got a friend
in Norway and he was
able to introduce WCF to
an object model that was
just a plain old CLR
object. And you don't even
see the WCF at all.
It's just like one line.
And all he did was
he just put in a
hook into the container, says,
okay, once you create something
and once it comes out
of there, I want WCF
support. And it was pretty
amazing considering it, it was
just like magic. It was
one minute there, or the
next minute it wasn't there.
But when you look at
the object model, it's just
a bunch of properties. Someone
had complained to me recently
at a presentation about some
of the complexities of WPF
around event notification and how,
you know, basic properties when
used in w PF have
to have to get really
complicated, especially with the notifications
and stuff. Are there examples
of using Lynne food clean
up WPF objects, objects that
are used within the context
of WPF or Silverlight? Oh,
no, there aren't any examples
with LIMU in WPF, but
there are a couple examples
with, with Bernhard Richter, I'll
post his log. And what
he did was he actually
put up, he's got a
project up called I can't
remember the project where we
post it later, but he
has a project that actually
puts an I notified property
change implementation as well as
I did an error validation.
And it's pretty much transparent.
For example, you can have
this one particular interface that
validates this one particular class
type, and you just drop
the DLL onto some directory
and LIMU scans it and
then inject it right into
the container. And the container
is smart enough to say,
okay, this particular instance needs
to be intercepted. And I
need to put these features
onto that one particular class
or object. It's pretty smart.
And a lot of containers
can do that, but for
at least for LIMU, it's
one of the interesting contradictions.
It does a lot of
complicated things, but for the
most of the time you
get most of the job
done in, but one or
two lines of code and
no fuss. I mean, you
never really see any ill
at all, unless you really
want to get into it.
Do what I have. What
if I have to debug
these things? What if I've
changed something? You can you
keep saying that that is,
I guess, where we both
agree that it can be
scary, but it's psychological. And
then you're saying that I
don't necessarily have to see
the IOL, but what if
something goes wrong? How do
I debug logging? If I
can't even see where it
got called? Well, do you
still get to actually see
the logging? Because once the,
the isle calls back to
your code, it tells you
where it's, where it's actually
being called from. And in
layman's terms, it's like a
styling home. It's pretty much
telling you where it was
intercepted. It gives you all
the information you need to
say, okay, this was intercepted
here. This was interceptive here,
as well as it's you
don't. Yeah, you do give
up some control, but the
control that it gives you
back is you get to
decide where, and when these
particular points of interception execute,
for example, in dynamic proxies,
you will often get the
method info and it'll tell
you everything you need to
know about the particular method
is executing. And it has
everything there, including the arguments,
whether it's generic or not.
So basically on one hand,
yet you lose control about
how it's actually compiled, but
when it actually runs, you
get to decide where things
execute, how they should be
executed and whether or not
you should just replace the
code altogether. I mean, it
sounds scary, but it's actually
quite simple. And a lot
of it is abstracted away.
So I put this into
nerd dinner, then I plug
it in like sit to
a controller factory. And then
what are some of the
different kinds of interception I
can do? I mean, I
can intercept at the class
level. So I could say
like, I want all dinners
to be intercepted. And then
can I intercept more granularly
than that? Oh, absolutely. You
could intercept at an instance
level. So if you have
one particular instance of that
one class, you can just
go ahead and intercept pretty
much anything on that particular
class instance, the types of
interception we go over, at
least for Lynne Fu is
there's method, body interceptions. That's
basically, you can take any
method, body, whether it's sealed
static, private, or public, and
you could pretty much swap
out the method, body implementation.
There are a few restrictions.
For example, you still have
to return the same type,
but for the most part,
you can pretty much do
whatever you want with it.
The other one is method
call site interception, which is,
would scare a lot of
people. Basically I can take
any system or any third
party method call and replace
it with your own. For
example, if you want to,
you had a hello world
program and you wanted to
replace it so that it
would instead send the hello
world over a network socket.
You could easily do that
with just, and you just
swap it out. Whether the
other one is new operators,
interception, which is, which is
the ability to take your
standard. C-sharp a new operator
or an IOP, the new
object instruction. And you basically
wrap up an IOU. What
is actually doing is it's
wrapping. And if statement around
it and saying, okay, should
I just let this thing
create itself? Or should I
provide something else in its
place? That's that's and it's
pretty handy in some certain
situations, once you want to
trace object construction, the other
one is field getter and
setter interception. So for example,
I can take any field
and intercept the point where
it's actually being accessed or
changed. So if I were
to set a foo field,
I could actually prevent it
from being set, or I
could actually just replace it
with another value with, with
whatever I want. The last
type is what I call
throwing an exception catching, which
is the ability to dynamically
catch any exception thrown from
any given method. There is
a small note with at
least with Lynn food's way
of doing it, which is
it's kind of opt in.
So you have to explicitly
say, I want to catch
exceptions out of this method.
And if I do catch
it, I either want to
swallow it, or I should
just let it regrow itself
back out. Those are the
kinds of, of interception that
LIMU provides. Of course your
mind was may vary. And,
and I really leave it
up to the responsible developer
to actually figure out what
they want to do with
it. But this is, it
gives you a lot of
flexibility at the same time.
You never ever see any
line of aisle. Do you
find yourself doing static, ILD
writing, which sounded guy role
rewriting makes more sense to
me, the idea that I'm
going to take some code
and I'm going to compile
it into, you know, I
L into DLLs, I think
sometimes some, some newer.net developers
forget that there, that there
is L I mean, they
think that they compile and
then this binary pops out,
but there's, you know, there's
ill in there and it
makes sense that post build
steps I can deal with
like emotionally, I get that,
but dynamic I'll be writing.
That seems scary. Like I'm
over the, Hey, I'll rewrite
my isle part of things,
but I'm not over the
I'll do it dynamically. Well,
it's actually two steps when
you're doing with static, ill
rewriting. It's basically that post
build step that changes your
assembly. For example, I know
post sharp as last time
I checked, they do static
I'll rewriting. So you could
Mark a particular attribute on
a particular method. Then all
of a sudden it would
just change that one particular
method with Lynn foo. It
goes dynamic by taking that
same static step. But instead
of putting in a specific
type of aspect or a
piece of code, it wraps
up a small little framework
around your, your methods. So
what happens is it will
ask you once that framework
is in place and you
run the program, it'll ask
you, okay, I'm inside this
method. Should I intercept it?
Or should I not? If
you don't want to intercept
it, it acts like it's
not even there. So when
we're talking about dynamic L
rewriting, what is actually, it's
kind of it's plus a
runtime interception. That's a more
accurate term for it. The,
the benefit of course, for
dynamic IO rewriting is you
can pretty much decide where
you want it to be.
There's also in terms of
build time. It it's pretty
much negligible. It's not like
a static where you'd have
to have to basically filter
through everything and decide what
you want to put in
and what you don't, because
there's some, there's some decisions
about what you need in
the application that cannot be
decided. And there's where it
gets interesting. And that's where
I think of things like
authorization. Yeah. I mean, there's
no way you could actually
put an authorization at compile
time. It just sounds silly.
But at runtime, it, it
makes perfect sense because you
need to be able to
get this information when the
program is running. And that,
of course, you're not going
to be able to get
that if you have something
statically, compiled, and you don't
know what machine is going
to run on and all
these different settings that you
might be worried about. So
what, what do you think
the future is for this?
I mean, is this going
to be, I mean, how
many people, let me ask
you, let me ask the
hard question I was going
to try to be nice,
but let me just ask
this, who's using this other
than Right now. This is,
this is the tool of
framework geeks. I mean, it's,
it sounds scary, but I
honestly think this, at least
on the dotnet side, it's
one of those rare things
that you won't hear about.
I mean, on the Java
side, they've been using this
a lot on aspect J
and they take advantage of
this a lot. And this
is, again, I, you did
bring up a valid point
that this is pretty exotic.
I mean, I don't recommend
it for everybody, but it's,
it's definitely another tool that
you put into your toolbox
as far as people that
use it. I mean, pretty
much anybody who uses in
hibernate uses some form of
dynamic proxy. It's unavoidable. It's
either castle or Lynn Fu
I mean it, and even
in your, your practice, I
mean, you probably use an
hibernate more than a few
dozen times, but the thing,
the thing that's nice is
you never really know that
there's a proxy there. They
never really, I mean, aside
from maybe that setting that
they say it will be
pick one proxy, but for
the most part, they never
really, you don't even realize
it's there. And that's the
beauty of AOP. I mean,
they're doing all this stuff
for you, but it's all
in the background. So the
future, at least for AOP
is that it's going to
be invisible, but there's, there's
still a lot more interesting
things that I would love
to dive into. I mean,
maybe I could talk about
more on multithreading or, or
use AOP to do trans
transparent IOC container injection. For
example, one of the big
things that they're trying to
do with some of the
containers right now, even with
meth, the management sensibility framework
is the big question. There
is, how do you make
it invisible? How do you
actually make extensibility invisible while
at the same time, allowing
users to be able to
take advantage of it with
AOP, it allows you to
add those features into place
without necessarily telling the end
user dev that you gotta
put this in yourself. And
I think that that nails
it, that that's the way
to do it. There are
things that developers shouldn't have
to worry about. Think about
separation concerns. This allows you
to do separation of concerns,
organizationally, Basically. And the other
thing is, I mean, there's
so many things that a
developer has to worry about
nowadays that, I mean, if
you're talking about like the
second or third tier framework
guys, like the architects, these
guys, I mean, for me,
it's my job, just to
make sure that when it
gets down to the ground
level or your average dev,
they don't see this. I
mean, they don't have to
worry about lazy loading. All
they got to worry about
is the business domain. And
in the, at the end
of the day, that's really
the focus here. We want
to take away all the
plumbing so that once you
strip everything away, the only
thing that you see is
the business domain. And I
think that's, what's missing right
now, because once you look
at these different frameworks that
they have everything from security
to logging to transaction management,
and it gets confusing. Once
you go through the code,
AOP offers that kind of
separation, of course, but it's
gonna take some time before
people wrap their heads around
it. I mean, it took
a while for people to
switch from imperative program to
event driven programming. And I
think that's, that's the shift
that we'll see within five
or 10 years in the
same way everybody takes object
oriented programming for granted nowadays.
I mean, that's, I think
where we're going to be
within five or 10 years
with AOP In closing, gimme
give me something that people
can, action can take action
on. So if someone's listening
to this, they're sitting in
the driveway of their, their
house or their place of
business. And they're like, all
right, I'm going to go
download Lynn Fu what's a,
an exercise that they can
do with an existing application.
That'll make them that'll light
them up. Well, one of
the things that you can
do with Lin Fu and
even AOP is ex copy
deployment. I mean, we're talking
about instant plugability. I mean,
that's has been talking about
this for a while. I
was doing this back in
2007, basically the idea is
you could, with AOP, you
could just plug things right
in without even changing a
lot of code. Like for
example, there are a was
one project where a guy
took Lin Fu and took
his five-year-old web app and
they couldn't change the production
code. So what he did
was he actually plugged in
food into it and he
was able to change it
without changing a single line
of code. Everything works, all
the tests passed, it just
works. So I could change.
I could change an app.
I don't even have the
source for correct. That'd be
interesting to add logging to
an existing app, but you're,
you're either afraid or to
recompile It. And it happens
a lot. There are other
things I've played around with
is you can actually add
a rapid unit test or
observe existing code. So you
can see what the input
and the output of each
method is. So I could
actually write, you know, your
Michael feathers working effectively with
legacy code type tests, where
you put in legacy characterization
tests, and you don't even
have to touch the code.
You just have to observe
what comes in and what
comes out. But that kind
of thing is only possible
AOP, because you don't want
to mess with production code,
especially if it works. If
you've got unit tests even
better, because even if you
plug the AOP right in,
you'll still be able to
verify that it works in
99.99, nine, 9% of the
time it works. And you
can easily verify with the
test if it does it
very cool. Thank you very
much for taking the time
to call in. And I
know you're up at one
in the morning, not a
problem. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes.